Advanced treatment options for children born with craniofacial anomalies

Oren Tepper, MD, Director of the Craniofacial Surgery Program, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein, for Montefiore Einstein, Rockland/Westchester Journal News

EN ESPAÑOL: Opciones avanzadas de tratamiento para niños nacidos con anomalías craneofaciales

It can be difficult for any parent to hear that their new or soon-to-be-born baby has a cleft lip, cleft palate, or other skull or facial anomaly. While these are among the most common birth anomalies, they are also among the most treatable. With the latest advances in treatment and technology, multidisciplinary teams of surgeons and specialists are significantly improving outcomes for patients with craniofacial disorders, from the fairly common to the extraordinarily complex.

Enhancing lives with the latest treatments and technologies

New technologies provide the ability to detect craniofacial birth anomalies during 20-week prenatal ultrasounds, which gives parents and doctors the opportunity before a baby is born to plan treatments, including surgical options. Whether babies are diagnosed in utero or once born, treatments to restore function and appearance can begin at just a few weeks of age. The craniofacial anomalies we most often see are cleft lip and/or palate, microtia (ear anomalies), and craniosynostosis (skull anomalies). Each affects different parts of the face and skull and require different kinds of treatments. With proper care and treatment, most children with these birth anomalies can enjoy childhood with confidence, inclusion, and joy.

The treatment path for cleft lip and/or palate

Nasoalveolar molding (NAM) is a presurgical treatment for certain types of cleft lip and/or palate, with the goal of reducing the size of the cleft before surgical repair. A shaping device similar to a retainer is fitted to the infant almost immediately after birth.  This device is worn until the baby is ready for surgical repair of the cleft lip, which occurs at 3 months old. Finally, the cleft palate repair is usually done between the ages of 9 and 12 months. These surgical repairs address both the functionality and the appearance of the cleft. At 3 to 4 years old, the child’s speech is evaluated by a speech therapist. At 7 years old, the child is evaluated to see how their teeth are growing in. When patients reach their teens, there are surgical treatment options to refine the nose, the lip, and even the teeth and bite if necessary.

Transformational treatments for earanomalies

There are different types of ear anomalies: some involve just the external ear, and others involve some internal structures. Some are mostly cosmetic in nature, and others cause functional problems.

For some types of external ear anomalies, where all the parts of the ear are present but misshapen, the ear can be molded to a more natural shape shortly after birth using an external non-invasive molding device (Earwell). This device is worn for 6 to 12 weeks, and once it’s removed the ear will hold the shape that it was molded into. This eliminates the need for surgical correction of the ear in the future.

For more extensive ear anomalies, in which parts of the ear are missing or much smaller than they should be (microtia), a new ear is sculpted out of bone. A series of surgeries then takes place when the patient is 7 to 8 years old.

Advanced technology and materials redefine care for craniosynostosis

The treatment of craniosynostosis is surgical repair to open up a fused cranial suture and reshape the skull. The development of resorbable plates has transformed this surgery and thus the outcomes. Resorbable plates hold the reshaped bones of the skull in place for 9 to 12 months, allowing the bones time to heal, and then the plates safely dissolve. The plates allow flexibility for the ongoing growth and development of the patient.

Another advancement in craniosynostosis treatment is the use of 3D modeling and printing to provide a custom guide for surgical planning. With CT scans of the patient’s skull, custom software allows the craniofacial team to create a 3D physical model to use as a reference before and during the treatment. These 3D photos are being taken in the operating room before and after the surgical repair to demonstrate the improvement in head shape.

Montefiore Einstein has one of the nation’s most advanced craniofacial programs

The Craniofacial Center at the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore (CHAM) leads groundbreaking advancements in craniofacial care. The center gained worldwide recognition for contributing to the successful separation of twin boys, Anais and Jadon McDonald, who were born cranially conjoined, with their brains intertwined.

CHAM is one of only a few centers in the nation with an advanced 3D printing lab, which has established a new standard of care for craniofacial surgeries. The CHAM multidisciplinary team of specialists dedicated to craniofacial care includes neurosurgeons; plastic surgeons; ear, nose, and throat surgeons; dental and orthodontic specialists; child-life specialists; speech therapists; and specialized nurse practitioners. Personalized treatment plans are created for each patient, leveraging the most up-to-date research to innovate and provide the best outcomes for children and families who come to us from our region, across the country, and around the world.

Families can have consultations close to home at any of our locations and affiliated practices in Connecticut, Westchester County, Manhattan, and the Bronx.

Learn more about the Craniofacial Center at CHAM online or call (917) 801-5577 to schedule a consultation.

