Back to beating strong — how Phyllis got her heart and her life back on track

Luigi Di Biase, MD, PhD, FACC, FHRS, System Director of Electrophysiology, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Con más fuerza que nunca: cómo Phyllis recuperó su corazón y su vida

Phyllis Steel has never been one to slow down. Whether she’s skiing moguls, playing tennis, or gliding through her daily swim, staying active is part of who she is. But when an irregular heartbeat started interrupting her rhythm, Phyllis turned to Montefiore Einstein for answers. What she found was care that not only cured her atrial fibrillation (AFib) but helped her get back to the life she loves.

“I would wake up in the middle of the night with a racing pulse,” she recalls. “I’m lying down in bed, and my pulse is 160, 165, like I’m doing cardio. It was unnerving.”

Each time Phyllis experienced one of these disturbing episodes, her first thought was to seek medical care. “I would wake my husband up in the middle of the night, and I would say, ‘Let’s go to Montefiore.’” But before they could make the 10-minute drive to the hospital, her heart usually calmed down, so they would return home and go back to bed. Though disconcerting, 10 to 15 minutes of cardiac irregularity once a month was reasonably easy to ignore. But after a year, the episodes were occurring more frequently and lasting upwards of 2.5 hours. That’s when Phyllis realized something had to be done.

The breakthrough procedure that helped Phyllis beat AFib

Once she decided to seek treatment, Phyllis connected with me and my team. “As soon as I met Dr. Di Biase, I felt his confidence,” she says. “I never panicked. He said, ‘Don’t worry, this is not a life-or-death situation. We’ll handle it.’”

In Phyllis’s case, we spent many months seeing how her condition responded to medication and studying her progress. But when she developed a second arrhythmia on top of the first, I gave Phyllis two options. Option one was to give her heart an electric shock to restore a normal rhythm in the acute setting, which was most likely not a long-term solution. Option two was to perform an ablation, a procedure in which we eliminate the electrical trigger in the heart that is responsible for her AFib.

Phyllis says, “I remember looking at him, and I said, ‘If it were your mother, what would you do?’ And he just smiled and said, ‘I would tell my mother to do the ablation.’” And with that her decision was made.

Back to beating strong

Today, Phyllis is doing great and enjoying the pool again. She’s also off her arrhythmia medication — and now that “Oma” is back on her feet, she’s back to planning special trips with her four grandchildren. “I’ve been much more active,” she says, “and I’ve got enough energy to take care of four grandchildren and live a healthy life with my husband.”

“I’m so grateful,” she says of her ablation experience. “I’m able to do the things that I really wanna do.”

Montefiore Einstein is ranked in the top 1% of all hospitals in the nation for heart and vascular care and is recognized as high-performing in heart arrhythmia and pacemaker implantation by U.S. News & World Report

Montefiore Einstein’s nationally recognized Center for Heart and Vascular Care has also achieved a “high performing” ranking in heart arrhythmia and pacemaker implantation from U.S. News & World Report. The Center for Heart and Vascular Care is a leader in heart rhythm disorders as well as interventional and minimally invasive cardiac procedures, and is at the forefront of using ventricular assist devices (VADs) for the treatment of heart failure.

The Center is also an international referral site for arrhythmia, heart failure, and mechanical circulatory support, including procedures such as catheter ablation and cardiac device implantation, performing more than 2,000 ablation procedures annually, making us one of the highest-volume centers in the Northeast. We are conducting research for the next generation of atrial fibrillation treatments, including participation in key FDA trials focused on the development of non-thermal energy sources for the treatment of atrial fibrillation, pulsed field ablation.

Montefiore Einstein is also a leader in performing left atrial appendage closure, a procedure that can reduce the risk of stroke for certain patients with AFib. We are able to perform this procedure at the same time as an ablation and do so at one of the highest rates in the Northeast.

We continue to expand access to our heart care excellence program across the region with the Montefiore Einstein Cardiac Surgery Program and the Montefiore Einstein Interventional Cardiology Program at White Plains Hospital as well as the Heart Center at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care–Westchester, a state-of-the-art facility located in the heart of Westchester, offering the latest diagnostics and care for patients with cardiac disease.

Montefiore Einstein is restoring lives through innovative heart care for our patients every day. Our unique patient care model provides comprehensive, individualized treatment; and leverages the vast resources available to our specialists, including groundbreaking proprietary research and state-of-the-art diagnostic and treatment technology.

Developing the first transvenous cardiac pacemaker and performing the first coronary bypass operation was only the beginning of Montefiore Einstein’s more than 60 years of leadership in heart care — and we’re not slowing down. Call (718) 920-7948 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care–Westchester or at any of our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including in the Bronx.

Read Phyllis’s full story here.

