Beating prediabetes: The indispensable lifestyle ally to diet and exercise

Sandra Aleksic, MD, Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Geriatrics, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Aliados indispensables en la prediabetes: estilo de vida, dieta y ejercicio

Sleep’s role in stopping prediabetes before it becomes Type 2 diabetes has been elevated by the American Diabetes Association, which now recognizes that sleep is as important as other lifestyle behaviors like physical activity and a healthy diet for managing blood sugar. Together, these habits support healthier glucose control and overall metabolic health, which can lower your risk for prediabetes and help prevent it from progressing to Type 2 diabetes and other serious conditions. But first, let’s look at the basics of prediabetes — and the healthy lifestyle habits proven to beat it.

Prediabetes: A silent early warning you can turn around

Prediabetes is characterized by blood sugar that’s higher than normal but not yet high enough to be considered Type 2 diabetes. This progressive condition is a silent threat because it has no symptoms. In fact, more than 80% of Americans diagnosed with prediabetes don’t notice any signs of it. Left unchecked, it can lead to Type 2 diabetes, which can damage your kidneys, heart, and eyes and increase your risk of heart disease and stroke. Even if the condition progresses more slowly, excess sugar in the blood can begin to damage vital organs. The good news is that you can halt its progression with some lifestyle changes. Even better, these changes have been proven not just to stop but also to reverse prediabetes. Here’s how.

4 lifestyle habits that can stop prediabetes in its tracks

The sooner a person adopts these four behavior habits the less likely they are to develop Type 2 diabetes.

1. Sleep Smart: Good sleep is one of the most powerful — and most overlooked — ways to lower your risk of prediabetes and stop it from progressing to Type 2 diabetes. Aim for about 7 to 9 hours most nights and keep a steady sleep schedule, going to bed and waking up at roughly the same times every day. Late nights, inconsistent sleep, or regularly getting too little or too much sleep — and having an evening chronotype (being a “night owl”) — raise your risk for both prediabetes and Type 2 diabetes. If you rarely wake up feeling rested or struggle to sleep well, talk with your doctor — improving sleep may be an important step in lowering your diabetes risk and protecting your long-term health.

2. Regular physical activity: Regular physical activity means getting at least 150 minutes of brisk walking or a similar activity every week. That’s just 30 minutes a day, five days a week.

3. A healthy diet: There’s no one-size-fits-all food plan for preventing diabetes, but a diet centered on vegetables, fruit, whole grains, and lean protein is recommended. The fiber in whole fruits and vegetables can help lower blood cholesterol and glucose levels. It’s also important to avoid added sugars by limiting soft drinks, sweets, and refined carbs like white bread, white rice, and white pasta. Whole fruits are a better option than fruit juices or smoothies because smoothies pulverize the fiber naturally present in whole fruit. As a result, blended fruit isn’t nutritionally equivalent to the same fruit left whole, according to some experts.

4. Losing some weight: If you’re overweight, even a small amount of weight loss can lower your risk of developing diabetes. Losing 5% to 7% of your body weight (10 to 15 pounds for a 200-pound person) can go a long way.

How prediabetes is detected

Screening for prediabetes typically includes tests performed during your annual primary care physical that measure blood sugar or glucose levels. The simplest common blood test is the hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), which reflects average blood glucose over about three months and is used to screen for prediabetes and diabetes. If your result is elevated, act quickly — early lifestyle changes or treatment can often prevent progression to Type 2 diabetes and reduce the risk of organ damage.

When to test for prediabetes — what raises your risk?

More than 80% of Americans diagnosed with prediabetes don’t notice any symptoms. Signs of persistent high blood sugar, like increased thirst, frequent urination, and blurred vision, don’t usually appear until prediabetes has progressed to Type 2 diabetes, which is more serious and much harder to control.

The risk of prediabetes increases with age, so the American Diabetes Association recommends screenings for everyone beginning at age 35. That said, it’s on the rise in teens. One in three adolescents is now believed to be living with prediabetes.

Screening is recommended for people of any age with the following risk factors:

Being obese or overweight
Having high blood pressure or high cholesterol
Smoking tobacco
Having had gestational (pregnancy-related) diabetes
Having certain health conditions, like HIV and polycystic ovary syndrome
Having a parent or sibling with Type 2 diabetes
Being of African American, Hispanic American, Asian American, or Indigenous American descent
Living a sedentary lifestyle (which may include being physically active fewer than three times a week or having a job that requires sitting for long hours each day)
A pattern of low-quality sleep, sleeping too few or too many hours, or going to bed late and waking up late (being “a night owl”)
Having a poor-quality diet — high in processed foods, sugary drinks, refined carbohydrates, and saturated fats, while low in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fiber.

Expert support, lasting results

It’s possible to make changes on your own, but a lot of people find greater success by enrolling in a personalized, CDC-recognized Diabetes Prevention Program. Developed in collaboration with health-care providers throughout the U.S., these programs provide individualized lifestyle modification plans and support teams of nutritionists, exercise therapists, and other experts. In a key research study, people who successfully completed a Diabetes Prevention Program saw a 58% reduction in their risk of developing Type 2 diabetes over the next three years. Participants over 60 reduced their risk by 71%. Speak with your doctor about the right program for you.

Montefiore Einstein is ranked in the top 1% of all hospitals in the nation by U.S. News & World Report for diabetes and endocrinology

Montefiore Einstein's Division of Endocrinology is one of the largest and most respected in the New York metropolitan area—and a premier choice for the management and care of Type 2 and Type 1 diabetes. Home to one of only 16 NIH-funded Diabetes Research Centers nationwide and the only NIH-funded Center for Diabetes Translation Research in the Northeast, our team of world-renowned board-certified physicians is dedicated to advancing diabetes care through leading-edge research and treatment.

As Montefiore Einstein expands our excellence in prediabetes and diabetes care across Westchester and the Hudson Valley, our globally and locally renowned physicians and specialist teams provide centralized, comprehensive care across the full range of advanced specialty services and treatments at our state-of-the-art Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care–Westchester facility, with on-site visitor parking and easy access via public transportation.

Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care–Westchester. For appointments at our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including the Bronx, please call (800) 636-6683.

