Could it be skin cancer? The signs, spots, and sun habits that matter

Beth N. McLellan, MD, Chief, Dermatology, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: ¿Será cáncer de piel? Los signos, manchas y hábitos que importan

“Could it be skin cancer?” It’s a question most of us ask ourselves at some point, usually while finding and inspecting a new spot on our skin. It’s easy to assume that skin cancer only happens on parts of the body that are regularly in the sun, like your face, arms, and neck, but it can also show up in surprising spots, like the scalp, armpits, between the toes, and even beneath the nails. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States—more common than all other cancers combined—though when diagnosed and treated early, most skin cancers are highly curable. Knowing the ABCDEs of spotting skin cancer and the 5 S's of sun safety can help you spot warning signs early and reduce your risk of developing skin cancer.

The ABCDEs of spotting skin cancer

Dermatologists suggest looking for the ABCDEs of skin cancer when evaluating a suspicious lesion. Watch for:

Asymmetricalor abnormally shaped moles
Borders that are irregular or uneven
Color differences within a mole or lesion
Diameter that is larger than a pencil eraser
Evolution, or changes in size, shape, or color. Evolution may be the most important warning sign.

The more often you examine your skin, the more familiar you’ll become with what’s normal on your body. Have your dermatologist check out anything that looks bigger, darker, or different than your other spots—or if it’s evolved in the past month.

Perform these monthly at-home skin checks in front of a full-length mirror. Look at your front and back with your arms raised so you won’t miss anything. Check under your arms, on the soles of your feet, on the palms of your hands, and between your toes. Use a hand mirror to examine the back of your neck and as much of your scalp as possible. You might want to enlist a partner or friend to take a look at your back and scalp. For those who wear nail polish, make sure to take a quick look for any new marks under your fingernails and toenails before you apply a new coat of polish.

Self-checks are especially important for those at higher risk of skin cancer, such as people who are immunocompromised, people who have had skin cancer before, and people with a strong family history of skin cancer.

It is still recommended to see a dermatologist for a full-body skin check once a year, because dermatologists have a well-trained eye and can check hard-to-view places like the back of your neck and seemingly hidden patches.

If you don’t have a dermatologist, please talk to your primary care physician about annual skin checks and a referral to a dermatologist.

Reduce your risk with the 5 S’s of sun safety

The steps you can take to lower your risk of skin cancer may not be new to you, but they have proven effective at reducing risk.

Up to 90% of skin cancers are directly attributable to exposure to sunlight or artificial tanning lights. The ultraviolet A (UVA) and ultraviolet B (UVB) components of the sun’s radiation are the culprits. UVA causes wrinkles and premature aging of the skin, while UVB causes burns, and both of them can lead to cancer. A combination of strategies to avoid exposure to UVA and UVB is outlined in the 5 S’s.

1. Slip on a T-shirt

2. Slop on a broad-spectrum sunscreen

3. Slap on a broad-brimmed hat

4. Seek shade whenever possible

5. Slide on quality sunglasses

The 5 S’s originated in Australia in response to a dramatic rise in cases of melanoma. After 40 years, declining skin cancer rates, particularly in younger Australians, have proven the effectiveness of this combination of measures, all of which come down to blocking harmful UVA and UVB rays.

Use sunscreen with “broad spectrum” on the label, for protection against UVA and UVB radiation. Seek products with at least SPF 30, and reapply every two hours. For people with more sensitive skin, consider using physical or mineral-blocker SPF ingredients, such as zinc oxide and/or titanium oxide. Look for new sunscreens coming later this year that include bemotrizinol—a photostable filter that extends broad-spectrum protection, especially against UVA, and helps sunscreens maintain SPF longer.

Physically blocking the sun with clothing, hats, and sunglasses is an easy way to protect yourself. Specially designed clothing is increasingly available with a much higher ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) than that of regular street clothes, and this can be especially helpful for days spent outdoors at the beach, at the pool, or on the water. There is even a laundry additive that you can add that will increase the UPF of your regular clothes.

Sun protection is important year-round, even during winter. Make it easy by choosing a moisturizer with sunscreen so that you do everything in one step.

Remember, sunscreen is for everyone, not just for people with fair skin. Not only does it decrease your risk of skin cancer, but it also protects against dark spots, wrinkles, and other signs of aging.

Skin cancer types and who’s at higher risk

Chronic sun exposure and a history of blistering sunburns increase your risk of skin cancer, regardless of gender or ethnicity. Skin cancer can develop in places that get lots of sun exposure, like the face, neck, and arms, as well as in parts that see little or no direct sun, like your buttocks or the soles of your feet.

Two types of skin cancer—basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma—are very common. They may initially look like a nonhealing pimple or a dry, rough patch, but if those types of lesions don’t return to normal within three or four weeks, have a dermatologist check them out.

Melanoma is a more serious, yet less common, form of skin cancer that often appears as new or changing brown spots. Those spots can even show up under fingernails and toenails. And although people who have fair skin and are more susceptible to sunburn can be at higher risk, individuals with darker skin are still at risk.

Montefiore Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center is among the elite 1% NCI Comprehensive Cancer Centers in the U.S. and ranked in the top 1% of all U.S. hospitals for cancer care, according to U.S. News & World Report

We have expanded access to our excellence in skin cancer prevention, detection, and treatment across New York City, Westchester County, and the Hudson Valley—including now available at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care in Westchester and Manhattan. Our nationally recognized dermatology team unites leading medical dermatologists with experienced cosmetic specialists, supported by advanced technologies and leading-edge clinical research to provide cancer screening and treatment from routine skin cancer screenings to photodynamic therapy and Mohs micrographic surgery. We also provide the latest innovations in skin resurfacing, hair restoration, acne treatment, scar removal, cosmetic procedures, and more.

The National Cancer Institute–designated Montefiore Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center is among the first academic medical centers in the New York area to offer tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy—the newly FDA-approved cellular immunotherapy treatment for advanced melanoma patients.

This innovative therapy is just one component of our approach to melanoma care. At the Montefiore Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center, skin cancer and melanoma patients benefit from customized treatment plans prepared by a multidisciplinary team of experts—including medical, surgical, and radiation oncologists and orthopedic surgeons—who consult with clinical experts in dermatology, plastic surgery, pathology, nutrition, and nuclear medicine.

Our center incorporates a comprehensive spectrum of traditional and holistic care, including psycho-oncology/behavioral medicine and supportive care, allowing us to deliver highly specialized, coordinated, and compassionate care for the whole person while addressing complex medical needs and improving each patient's quality of life.

Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment with one of our dermatologists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care – Westchester. Call (212) 324-4222 to make an appointment with one of our dermatologists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care – Manhattan West. For appointments with a dermatologist at our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including the Bronx, please call (866) 633-8255. To make an appointment for skin cancer care, please call (833) 632-2623, or learn more about our excellence in cancer care HERE.

