Don’t underestimate shingles

Pamela S. Jakubowicz, MD, Attending Physician and Assistant Professor of Dermatology, for Montefiore Einstein

While many people know shingles is a viral infection that causes a painful rash, which anyone who’s had chickenpox can get, it can also cause long-term conditions that should not be underestimated. The virus that causes both chickenpox and shingles can reactivate at any time — especially if you’re over 50 or have a weakened immune system — and puts you at risk of not just the rash but also serious complications like skin infections, long-term nerve pain, and even vision and hearing loss. Prompt medical intervention can not only help you heal faster but also reduce the risk of these complications. Here’s what you need to know about the shingles shot for prevention, ways to minimize symptoms and reduce the risk of complications, and more.

6 facts about shingles

1. About 1 in 5 people with shingles will have long-term nerve pain. Although most people recover fully in 3 to 5 weeks, the risk of complications increases if you have a compromised immune system or are over 50. Long-term nerve pain, known as post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN), can be debilitating.

2. Other potential long-term complications. Shingles anywhere on the face can affect the eye, potentially leading to vision loss. Other complications, while rare, can include hearing issues, facial paralysis, encephalitis (brain inflammation), and even pneumonia.

3. The #1 thing you can do to prevent shingles. The latest shingles vaccine is more than 90% effective at preventing the condition in healthy adults. Vaccination is recommended for everyone 50 and older, including those who have had shingles in the past or have been vaccinated for chickenpox. It’s also available to people 19 and older who have compromised immune systems due to disease or medical treatment. Ask your doctor if the vaccine is right for you.

4. Minimizing symptoms and reducing your risk of complications if you do get shingles. It’s important to see a doctor right away if you think you might have shingles, especially if it appears on your face, neck, or head. Safe, effective antiviral medications are available to help you heal faster and reduce the risk of complications, but they must be taken promptly — within 2 to 3 days of symptoms appearing. Pain medications may be prescribed as well. An urgent-care provider, dermatologist, or primary care doctor can diagnose and treat shingles.

5. Shingles symptoms can differ from person to person.

The most common symptoms can include:

Pain, tingling, itching, or other unusual skin sensations. These can start a few days before a rash develops. Early shingles pain can be mistaken for muscle soreness.
A blistering rash that typically appears on just one side of the body or face, neck, or head, sometimes in a distinct band that runs across the right or left side of the torso. The rash may be red, purple, gray, or brown, depending on a person’s skin tone. Blisters burst and crust over before the rash disappears, usually in about seven to ten days.
Fever
Chills
Headache
Malaise and/or fatigue
Upset stomach and vomiting

6. Shingles can be triggered at any age. We still don’t know exactly what causes the chickenpox, or varicella-zoster, virus to reactivate, but it can happen at any age. The risk increases as we get older and whenever the immune system is weakened — including in times of extreme stress. Most people get shingles only once, although it can recur in those with autoimmune conditions. You’re at higher risk for shingles if you are:

Age 50 or older
Being treated for or living with certain cancers, such as lymphoma or leukemia
Living with HIV (human immunodeficiency syndrome)
Taking immunosuppressive medications, like steroids or biologics, for a health condition
Exposed to someone who has open blisters from shingles

Montefiore Einstein is a leader in comprehensive dermatology care and research

Montefiore Einstein Dermatology offers comprehensive prevention and treatment options for shingles across the New York metro area and the Hudson Valley. Our multidisciplinary team of board-certified specialists provides the latest treatments to help patients recover from the potential pain, discomfort, and cosmetic effects and potential long-term complications of shingles, as well as the entire spectrum of skin disorders and diseases. Our approach to dermatologic care is supported by advanced technologies and our leading-edge research for the prevention and treatment of skin disorders and diseases.

We’ve expanded our dermatologic care in Westchester and the Hudson Valley. Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care—Westchester is a state-of-the art facility that includes dermatology as well as more than 20 other specialties. Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment with one of our dermatologists and to find out more about the specialty centers and clinical services offered at this facility, located in the heart of Westchester.

For appointments at our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including the Bronx, please call (800) 633-8255.

