Flu protection isn’t about doing more. It’s about timing it right.

Alice S. Teich, MD, Medical Director, Family Health & Wellness Center–Montefiore Medical Group, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Protegerse contra la gripe no es hacer más. Es actuar en el momento justo.

Don’t let the flu derail your season. Staying healthy isn’t about doing more — it’s about acting at the right time. Between now and late spring, four smart, science-backed moves can help you stay ahead of the flu and avoid days in bed battling fever, exhaustion, and body aches.

While most people recover from flu within two weeks, the virus can lead to serious complications, especially in very young children, older people, and those with certain chronic health conditions. Whether you’re protecting yourself, your children, or elderly family members, knowing the symptoms and when to act is what makes all the difference.

Here’s your timing-based roadmap to a healthier flu season.

4 smart moves to derail the flu — and when to make them

1. Start now with a flu shot, your best defense. The flu vaccine lowers the risk of getting sick, and more importantly, it’s proven to be effective at protecting you from serious disease and complications if you do contract the virus. People over 65 and children under 5 — especially those younger than 2 — are at higher risk of flu complications like pneumonia and other severe heart and brain complications. Pregnant people and those with medical problems like asthma, diabetes, and heart disease are at risk for more serious complications of the flu.

You can safely receive the flu shot even if you have egg allergies, according to the CDC and experts at Immunize.org. Seniors over 65 can receive a special high-dose formulation for extra protection. Once you’re vaccinated, it takes about two weeks for your body to build up the antibodies you’ll need for peak protection. The earlier you get a flu shot the better, since flu season typically starts by October and can last until late spring.

2. Make handwashing a frequent habit — at home, at school, at work, and on the go. When soap and water aren’t available, use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.

3. Keep hands away from faces. The flu virus enters through your eyes, nose, and mouth. Teach this habit to children early and model it consistently.

4. Add more protection by wearing a mask in public. Sick members of your household can protect others by wearing a mask around them at home.

When flu symptoms strike: Your fast-track recovery plan

Identifying whether or not you have the flu as soon as possible will help your provider determine the treatment that will work best for you. Based on their assessment, which may include a flu test, your provider will decide whether you might benefit from a prescription antiviral medication, which can help your body fight the virus and prevent complications. Antivirals aren’t suitable for everyone, and to be effective for most people they must be taken within two days of the first flu symptoms, which may include:

Sore throat
Coughing
Runny nose
Headaches
Body aches and pains
Fatigue
Fever and chills
Diarrhea
Vomiting

If you’re experiencing any of these, get plenty of rest and guard against dehydration by drinking plenty of liquids, especially if your symptoms include fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. If you don’t see a provider and are experiencing mild flu symptoms, then over-the-counter fever reducers and pain medications, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, can be taken according to directions to relieve symptoms.

If you experience any of the following, you should seek help at an emergency room or urgent care center immediately.

Respiratory difficulties, including shortness of breath and trouble breathing while talking
Confusion or other sudden changes in mental status
Severe vomiting or diarrhea
Signs of dehydration, such as infrequent urination, dark yellow urine, headache, and dizziness, especially when accompanied by vomiting or diarrhea
Any other symptoms that are unusual for you, in terms of what you usually experience with an upper respiratory infection

If you or your child are in a high-risk category and develop the flu or flu-like symptoms, it’s important to contact a health-care provider immediately.

Montefiore Einstein can help you have a healthy flu season at any of our 20-plus primary-care and urgent-care locations

Your healthiest flu season starts here. Montefiore Einstein offers accessible, expert care at more than 20 conveniently located primary-care and urgent-care centers throughout the Bronx and Westchester — including our state-of-the-art Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care facilities. Our nationally ranked providers deliver personalized flu prevention strategies, vaccinations, and treatment for the whole family. From routine flu shots to addressing symptoms when they appear, we’re here to keep you and your loved ones protected. Explore our location finder to discover the nearest center, then book your visit in just a few clicks.

