Guy Monseair’s heart stopped twice. He was back coaching in just 10 days.

By Robert E. Michler, MD, Surgeon-in-Chief and Chair, Surgery and Cardiothoracic & Vascular Surgery, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: El corazón de Guy se detuvo 2 veces; en 10 días volvió a entrenar.

“How do you thank someone for saving your life?”

City Island rowing coach Guy Monseair was on top of the world. At 53, he had a job he loved, working with promising young athletes and enjoying glorious days on the water. But everything changed in an instant the summer afternoon that his heart stopped not once but twice.

The race to save Guy’s life after two life-threatening cardiac arrests

A critical decision and no time to wait

Guy was at risk of yet another sudden cardiac event, so there was no time to wait. We had a critical decision to make in the race to save his life. We decided to proceed with emergent quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery, even though Guy’s heart was now swollen and weak. We knew it would be a technically challenging operation, but we specialize in handling cases like this. There are very few health systems in the country with the knowledge base and skills we have at Montefiore Einstein for managing these kinds of complex, life-threatening conditions.

And with Guy we also had a patient who would bravely push through his recovery, determined to get back to his rowing team as soon as possible. He was resolute when he said, “I have a team of 47 spectacular athletes, and the thought that I would not be able to get back was just unacceptable.”

Back in the coaching launch in just ten days

After such a serious surgery, he anticipated that his recovery would take quite some time. I told him I would have him back in the coaching launch in ten days. The board and parents thought that was never going to happen — this is open-heart surgery. But sure enough, he was back in the coaching launch in just ten days.

He told me that he’ll never forget the moment he reunited with his team. “They were crying, and I was crying,” Guy said, “and no one could really believe it. I thought, just two weeks ago, I technically died. And here I am. I got another chance. I’m incredibly lucky.”

But for me, “luck” had nothing to do with it. The system that saved Guy’s life worked exactly as it was designed to work. It was efficient, it was rapid, and it was premier.

“How do you thank someone for saving your life?” he says today. “I am so grateful to Montefiore Einstein. The fact that I was able to recover so quickly was absolutely a testament to the extraordinary work that they did. They saved my life. I can never thank them enough.”

Montefiore Einstein is ranked in the top 1% of all hospitals in the nation for heart and vascular care by U.S. News & World Report

Montefiore Einstein’s nationally recognized Center for Heart and Vascular Care is leading the fight against heart failure with its Center for Advanced Cardiac Therapy. Our center uses an integrated team approach to provide individualized treatment for each patient. We continue to expand our cardiac surgery program across the region, including the Montefiore Einstein Cardiac Surgery Program at White Plains Hospital, in Westchester, which has been expanded with the recently launched Structural Heart Program, now making us one of only two health-care facilities offering the transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) procedure in Westchester.

The Montefiore Einstein Advanced Heart Failure Program is one of only 15 in the entire country participating in the American College of Cardiology’s Patient Navigator program which supports a team of caregivers assisting each patient during and after hospital stays to ease recovery and reduce the risk of readmission, enhancing long-term wellness. Medical and surgical advances, including implanted devices to assist heart function, are available along with access to exclusive studies of promising new therapies for advanced heart disease. Our world-renowned surgeons offer a full spectrum of surgical therapies for advanced heart failure, including leading treatment using ventricular assist devices (VADs) for the treatment of heart failure.

Our Center for Heart and Vascular Care is an international referral site for heart failure, arrhythmia, and mechanical circulatory support, including procedures such as cardiac device implantation and catheter ablation, performing more than 2,000 ablation procedures annually. Our center also serves as a rigorous educational facility for medical fellows, taking great pride in training the next generation of innovative electrophysiologists.

Montefiore Einstein is restoring lives through innovative heart care for our patients every day. Our unique patient care model provides comprehensive, individualized treatment; and leverages the vast resources available to our specialists, including groundbreaking proprietary research and state-of-the-art diagnostic and treatment technology.

Developing the first transvenous cardiac pacemaker and performing the first coronary bypass operation was only the beginning of Montefiore Einstein’s more than 60 years of leadership in heart care — and we’re not slowing down.

Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care—Westchester. Call (212) 324-4222 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at Montefiore Einstein—Manhattan. Call (914) 849-4327 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at the Montefiore Einstein Cardiac Surgery Program at White Plains Hospital. To make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at one of our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including in the Bronx, please call (718) 920-5949.

See more of Guy’s heart failure reversal story here.

