Heart-healthy vegetable and chickpea paella

Monica Kelly, MS, RD, CDN, CNSC, for Montefiore Einstein

En Español: Paella cardiosaludable de garbanzos y vegetales

This vegetable and chickpea paella is a delightful vegetarian take on the traditional Spanish rice dish. It’s one of my go-to dinners when I want something healthy, high in fiber, and quick to prepare.

Chickpeas: a super-legume

Chickpeas are among my favorite legumes for both their health benefits and their savory taste. Their low glycemic index helps regulate blood sugar, and they’re an excellent source of plant-based protein for vegetarians, vegans, or anyone trying to follow a plant-based diet. They’re also rich in choline, which helps support brain and nervous system function. This recipe packs in even more protein by adding kidney beans. Not only are they also a great source of dietary fiber, they contain vitamin B1, which supports cognitive function.

High-fiber, low-glycemic index

Brown long-grain rice helps you feel satiated for longer thus aiding in weight management. Because it contains both the bran and germ of the rice, it also adds an extra boost of dietary fiber when compared with white rice. The addition of diced zucchini, another food with a low glycemic index, contributes the antioxidants lutein and zeaxanthin, which are important for our vision.

Red onions for heart and gut health

Red onion, however, is the secret star of this recipe. It’s rich in antioxidants, which combat the damage caused by free radicals in the body. Additionally, the sulfur compounds in red onions support heart health, lowering inflammation and promoting healthy circulation throughout the body. It also provides prebiotics, which help maintain a robust balance of gut bacteria and support digestion.

I hope you enjoy this colorful paella dish as much as I do — it’s perfect for summer evenings and can be on your dinner table in under an hour.

Vegetable and Chickpea Paella

Ingredients:

3 tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil

2 garlic cloves, minced

1 cup red onion, chopped

1 cup finely diced fresh tomato

½ cup of carrots, diced

½ cup red or green bell pepper, diced

½ cup of cooked or canned kidney beans, rinsed and drained

½ cup zucchini, diced

1 cup cooked or canned chickpeas, rinsed and drained

4 cups low-sodium vegetable broth

¼ teaspoon curry

⅓ teaspoon cumin

3 bay leaves

2 cups of brown long-grain rice

Preparation:

In a pan (19-inch diameter) or a saucepan as shallow as possible, heat the oil and cook the onion, garlic, and then add tomato and cook for about 6 minutes.
Then, add the carrot, pepper, and beans to the sauce. Cook for about 10 minutes, stirring occasionally. Next, add the zucchini and cook for 4-5 more minutes.
Add the chickpeas, broth, and spices. Stir. Add the rice forming a cross.
Cover with aluminum foil, reduce heat to medium-low, and cook until liquid has been consumed. Rotate the pan occasionally. If you require more liquid, add broth or hot water little by little, distributing it throughout the saucepan.
Remove from heat and let sit for 10 minutes.

All ready to enjoy!

This recipe makes 4 servings.

Total preparation time 40 minutes.

Servings: 4

Amount per serving

Calories              610

% Daily Value*

Total Fat      	16g	21%
Saturated Fat	2.5g	13%
Cholesterol	0mg	0%
Sodium	100mg   	4%
Total Carbohydrate	100g  	36%
Dietary Fiber	10g        	36%
Total Sugars	8g
Protein	19g
Vitamin D	0mcg   	0%
Calcium	80mg    	6%
Iron	4.2mg       	25%
Potassium	960mg  	20%

*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.

Interested in learning more about Montefiore Einstein’s commitment to creating a healthy community?

Visit https://montefioreeinstein.org.

