Most strokes are preventable — cut your stroke risk by 80%

Charles C. Esenwa, MD, Physician, Center for Comprehensive Stroke Care, for Montefiore Einstein.

EN ESPAÑOL: Prevención de accidente cerebrovascular (stroke): Reduzca el riesgo un 80 %

Many of the biggest stroke risk factors develop quietly, without obvious symptoms. Most strokes are preventable—and what you do each day can make a powerful difference. From managing blood pressure and staying active to eating well, sleeping better, and managing stress, these habits can reduce your risk by up to 80%. Starting early—and staying consistent—matters.

8 proven habits that can lower your stroke risk—at any age

1. Eating a low-sugar/low-sodium diet: Consume a diet rich in fruits and vegetables and reduce sugar and salt intake. The American Heart Association recommends a Mediterranean-style diet—one focused on whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts and legumes, fish, and healthy fats like olive oil—to reduce stroke risk and support cardiovascular health. Kick-start your healthy habits today with delicious mini garden-fresh vegetable egg bites.

2. Engaging in regular physical activity: The American Heart Association recommends 150 minutes of physical activity per week (or 30 minutes a day, five days a week) for adults and at least 60 minutes of exercise per day for kids ages 6 to 17.

3. Controlling high blood pressure: High blood pressure is the biggest risk factor for strokes. We call it the silent killer because people may have high blood pressure for years without experiencing any symptoms until they have a stroke. It’s important to get your blood pressure checked regularly, even if you’re under 50.

4. Screening for/managing high cholesterol and diabetes: Regular screening for high cholesterol and diabetes (high blood sugar) is important, especially if they run in the family. High cholesterol can lead to prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, as well as atherosclerotic disease (“hard blood vessels”) both of which raise stroke risk.

5. Paying attention to your heart and underlying conditions: Treating conditions like atrial fibrillation (AFib), heart disease, and carotid artery disease reduces your risk of having a stroke.

6. Quitting smoking or vaping: Tobacco use can damage blood vessels, increase heart rate, cause inflammation, and make blood more likely to clot, all of which increase stroke risk.

7. Limiting stress: Stress can lead to increased blood pressure and higher levels of sugar and fat in the blood, which can increase the risk of clotting.

8. Getting healthy sleep: Adequate sleep promotes healing, improves brain function, and reduces the risk of stroke and many chronic diseases. Adults should seek 7 to 9 hours of sleep each night.

Even with the right habits, routine checkups play a critical role in lowering stroke risk. Because your primary care doctor is your first line of defense against stroke, regular visits help catch silent risk factors—like high blood pressure, cholesterol, blood sugar, and heart rhythm changes—early. Over time, they help track your progress and adjust your care so you can stay ahead of risk.

It’s also important for women to know that they can be at a higher risk of stroke during the third trimester of pregnancy and right after birth, especially if they’ve been diagnosed with preeclampsia, a pregnancy complication characterized by high blood pressure. Women who use oral contraceptives are also at a slightly higher risk of stroke, especially if they also smoke.

Every second counts: how to recognize a stroke and BE FAST

Quick action saves lives, and the acronym BE FAST is a great way to remember the most common symptoms of stroke and what to do if someone, including yourself, is experiencing any of them.

B – Balance: Have they lost their balance?

E – Eyes: Have they lost vision in one or both eyes?

F – Face: Does one side of their face droop when they’re asked to smile?

A – Arms: Does one arm drift downward when they’re asked to raise both arms?

S – Speech: Is their speech slurred when they’re asked to repeat a simple phrase?

T – Time: Call 911 immediately if you observe any one of these signs.

Whenever a stroke is suspected, call 911 immediately. Don’t worry about whether or not your diagnosis is correct. The most important thing is to get to a certified comprehensive stroke center as quickly as possible.

Montefiore Einstein delivers advanced stroke prevention and comprehensive care if stroke happens.

We have expanded access to our excellence in stroke prevention across New York City, Westchester County, and the Hudson Valley—including now available at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care in Westchester and Manhattan. From preventive screenings and wellness assessments to managing conditions like high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease, our approach goes beyond treating symptoms—we focus on your overall health to help lower your risk of stroke.

If a stroke does occur, where you go matters. The Joint Commission has designated Montefiore Einstein as an Advanced Comprehensive Stroke Center (CSC)—the first and one of the only centers between New York City and Rochester — one of about 300 nationwide. To be certified as a comprehensive stroke center, the center must provide state-of-the-art care for all neurovascular conditions, including stroke, aneurysms, and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), while following the most current treatment guidelines, achieving outstanding outcomes, and leading research to continue to advance effective treatments that give stroke patients the best chance for a full recovery.  Our world-renowned doctors use the latest technology and techniques to diagnose and treat stroke faster and more accurately than ever before, increasing the odds of reversing long-term disability.

Once treated, as soon as patients start improving, they receive state-of-the-art physical therapy and rehabilitation care at Montefiore Einstein’s Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, in Westchester. Studies have shown that this form of multidisciplinary care greatly improves patient outcomes.

We’re ranked in the top 1% of all U.S. hospitals for neurology and neurosurgery, and Montefiore Einstein’s Burke Rehabilitation Hospital is also ranked in the top 1% of all U.S. hospitals for rehabilitation, according to U.S. News & World Report. Additionally, we are recipients of the highest standard for rehabilitation medicine, a three-year designation granted by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF).

Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment with a Montefiore Einstein primary care specialist for stroke prevention at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care—Westchester. For appointments at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care—Manhattan, please call (212) 324-4222. For appointments at our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including The Bronx, please call (800) 636-6683. Learn more about Montefiore Einstein’s Comprehensive Stroke Center.

