Safe sleep practices to reduce babies’ SIDS risk

Jillian Parekh, MD, Attending Physician, Academic General Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Prácticas seguras para reducir el riesgo de muerte súbita en bebés

For about 3,400 American families each year, the joy of a new baby in the home is cut short by sudden unexpected infant death (SUID). Some of these tragic incidents are attributed to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), which is the death of an apparently healthy baby — under one year of age, while sleeping — that cannot be explained after a thorough investigation. While experts are still working to figure out exactly what causes SIDS, there are ways to reduce risk and keep babies safe while sleeping. The American Academy of Pediatrics has developed a comprehensive set of guidelines for parents and caregivers, including the ABCs of safe sleep.

The ABCs of safe sleep for babies

A = Alone: Infants are safest when they sleep alone — not with their parents, other children (including twins or other siblings), or pets.

B = On their Back: Infants should always be put to bed flat on their backs, not on their sides or tummies.

C = In a Crib: Infants are safest sleeping in their own crib with a flat, firm mattress fitted with a snug sheet. The crib should be bare — there should be no pillows, loose sheets, blankets, stuffed animals, toys, padded crib bumpers, or clothing, all of which could cover a baby’s mouth and nose and interfere with their ability to breathe.

Beyond the ABCs: Additional safe sleep practices

Sharing a room: For at least the first six months, it’s ideal for babies to sleep in a crib close to their parents’ bed. Doing so lowers a baby’s risk of SIDS and sleep-related accidents compared with babies who sleep in separate rooms.

Keeping cool during bedtime: Avoid overheating in infants. As a rule of thumb, babies need just one more layer than an adult needs to stay warm in the same environment. When more warmth is needed, parents can use a sleep sack, or wearable blanket, to add an additional layer with the convenience of built-in swaddles.

Using a pacifier: After breastfeeding is established, offering a pacifier for daytime and nighttime sleep has been shown to help protect against SIDS.

Focusing on preventive health: SIDS prevention starts during the prenatal period. Reducing the chance of having a pre-term or low-birth-weight baby and avoiding exposure of the fetus to drugs and alcohol are important steps, because the healthier the mother is, the lower the risk of sudden infant death. Babies whose mothers smoke during pregnancy and/or are exposed to cigarette smoke after birth have a higher risk of SIDS. Keeping infants up to date with the AAP- and CDC-recommended childhood vaccines may also be protective.

Breastfeeding if possible: Breastfeeding, even for as little as two months, has been shown to be SIDS-protective. Breastfeeding does not need to be exclusive for a baby to be protected; babies who are breastfed and also receive infant formula are protected as well.

Avoiding oxygen monitors and positioning devices: Products like these, claiming to protect infants from SIDS, are unnecessary, often untested, and possibly unsafe.

The ABCs should bring you better ZZZs

Being a new parent comes with so much joy but also so much worry … and exhaustion. We hope that knowing and following these safe-sleep recommendations will help new parents put their babies (and themselves) to bed with less worry.

The Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein has been recognized by U.S. News & World Report as one of the best in the nation for the 16th year in a row

Montefiore Einstein offers the best care for the most vulnerable babies andis part of the New York State Perinatal Quality Collaborative, which supports safe sleep education in the hospital setting and beyond. In addition to outreach efforts to families, it works with retailers who sell infant bedding to educate them on appropriately modeling safe sleep environments in displays. This long-established program has been integral to educating parents about safe sleep for infants.

Our board-certified neonatologists, neonatal practitioners, and extended team of neonatal specialists and support staff have the proven track record to provide the best possible care for your infant. For families who have lost a baby and don’t have an identifiable cause, Montefiore Einstein’s Center for CardioGenetics offers evaluation and genetic testing for underlying medical conditions or health risks that may have predisposed the child to sudden death and which may impact other family members.

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein is committed to helping families overcome any financial barriers to safe sleep for their infants. We help parents access the federally funded Cribs for Kids program to assist in the purchase of cribs and bassinets, as well as the Health Alliance of Hudson Valley, in partnership with New York State’s Healthy Start program, for low-cost or free sleep resources.

To schedule an appointment with one of our general pediatricians, contact one of our practices below:

• Comprehensive Family Care Center, 1621 Eastchester Road, Bronx, NY 10461 at (718) 405-8040

• Comprehensive Health Care Center, 305 East 161st Street, Bronx, NY 10451 at (718) 579-2500

• Family Care Center, 3444 Kossuth Avenue, Bronx, NY 10467 at (718) 920-2273

• LINCS Complex Care Program, 3415 Bainbridge Avenue, Bronx, NY 10467 at (718) 741-2450

