Slowing the progression of kidney disease in children

Nicole Hayde, MD, Medical Director of Pediatric Kidney Transplantation, Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Frenar la progresión de la enfermedad renal en niños

Chronic kidney disease in children, though uncommon, has significant implications for a child’s quality of life. Due to the rapid increase in childhood Type 2 diabetes and hypertension in children, the overall prevalence of chronic kidney disease is expected to increase in the United States. Early treatment is key to helping preserve kidney function longer by slowing the disease progression. Adherence to treatment that includes medication and a restrictive diet is challenging for adults and even more so for children. When suffering from chronic illnesses, children often feel like they don’t have any control over their lives. When a child’s kidneys are not functioning at full capacity, the effects on their physical, cognitive, and emotional health are wide-ranging. Finding new ways for parents and caregivers to involve children in the care of their disease continues to build on the support foundation they provide and can empower children to believe they can have control over their life.

Empowerment-building tools

Sticking with medication: Collaborate with your child to understand their feelings around their medications, so you can both find ways to improve their motivation to stick with medications. Some ideas others have found helpful include utilizing colorful calendars and fun pill organizers containing empowerment messages, sending encouraging text messages, and leaving thoughtful notes.

Keeping to the diet: Build your child’s diet with them. Based on the foods your child likes the most within their diet, make menu planning and grocery shopping an interactive experience by having your child be an active participant in selecting foods and meals. Experiment with tools to enhance the experience, such as visual menu and grocery list planners using stickers and colorful markers and crayons.

Becoming a school messenger: Empower children to be a key messenger with their teachers about school schedule interruptions resulting from their medical appointments. One idea is to create with your child a visually engaging appointment calendar they can share with their teachers to work together on how not to fall behind.

Exploring new social connections: You and your child can continue working together to explore different physical activities and sports that bring more joy and control in their life. Explore specialized camps, both summer and year-round virtual, that allow them to connect with kids like them who are having similar life challenges. These specialized camps provide the opportunity to enjoy new experiences and activities and improve techniques for managing and being in control of their medical condition. The Frost Valley YMCA camp attracts children with chronic kidney disease from the region, and both doctors and nurses are present throughout the entire camp to provide any care campers with chronic kidney disease require.

Discovering their purpose: Children have a sense of control over their life when they discover their purpose. You and your child can work together to explore their interests through reading, research, and other activities. Talk with them about their passions to help them set goals.

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore has been ranked among the nation’s best in pediatric nephrology 15 years in a row by U.S. News & World Report

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore (CHAM) is home to the Ira Greifer Children’s Kidney Center, one of the nation’s largest, most experienced, and most innovative centers dedicated to caring for children with kidney disease. CHAM was a partner in the establishment of the nation’s first dedicated summer camp experience for kids with pediatric kidney disease. This program started over 45 years ago and continues to this day.

CHAM’s physician scientists continue to advance knowledge about pediatric kidney disease by researching and pioneering new treatments and have received multiple National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants over the years. Montefiore Einstein has over 60 years of experience in adult and pediatric kidney transplants. We performed one of the first pediatric kidney transplants in history and opened the first dedicated pediatric dialysis facility in New York state. Our adult and pediatric kidney transplant survival rate is the highest in New York state, with 100% pediatric kidney transplant survival.

With one of the nation’s longest-running kidney transplant programs, we have some of the shortest wait times for a kidney in the country. Our Live and Let Live website is a great resource for learning more about living organ donation and start the process of becoming a living donor. For Montefiore Einstein patients who are waiting for a lifesaving kidney or liver, we created the Live and Let Live Digital Tool to help them tell their “I want to live” personal stories, which they can use to create social posts. The tool also creates flyers, posters, and postcards, all with the goal of helping them find a living organ donor. See the powerful, moving stories of patients who are waiting for a lifesaving organ on our Live and Let Live website and learn more about living organ donation.

