Spotting heart disease and how to stop it

Mario Garcia, MD, Chief, Cardiology, Montefiore Einstein, and Co-Director, Montefiore Einstein Center for Heart and Vascular Care, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Sugerencias para detectar y frenar la enfermedad cardiaca

You can spot a serious heart condition and stop it before it becomes life‑threatening. Still, thousands of Americans quietly live with preventable heart problems—and heart disease remains the leading cause of death in the U.S., claiming more lives than all cancers combined. From subtle shortness of breath to unexplained fatigue, early clues are easy to miss. By learning the warning signs and adopting preventative steps that actually work, you can significantly lower your risk. First, here are the six most common types of heart disease.

The 6 most common types of heart disease—and how they affect your heart

Heart disease—or cardiovascular disease—covers a range of conditions that affect how your heart works. The most common types include:

1.Coronary heart disease (CHD): Also called coronary artery disease (CAD),this is the most common form of heart disease. It occurs when plaque builds up in the arteries that supply blood to the heart. Over time, this can reduce blood flow and lead to chest pain, heart attack, or heart failure. A key concern is that over 800,000 Americans experience a heart attack each year—often occurring suddenly and without prior warning—underscoring the need for widespread screening and proactive preventive measures among adults.

2. Arrhythmia: Referring to abnormal heart rhythm, arrhythmia can impact how well your heart works. In some instances, your heart may not be able to pump enough blood to meet your body’s needs. AFib (Atrial fibrillation), one of the most common arrhythmias, can lead to blood clot formation in the heart—resulting in stroke—as well as the development of heart failure.

3.Heart-valve problems: When heart valves are not able to open and close properly, the amount of blood that flows to and from your heart can change, impacting healthy circulation.

4. Heart failure: When your heart isn’t pumping blood as well as it should, heart failure can occur. Contrary to its name, the heart keeps working, but the body’s need for blood and oxygen is not being met.

5. Stroke: An ischemic stroke is the most common type of stroke, occurring when a blood vessel that feeds the brain becomes blocked. When the blood supply to a part of the brain is cut off, brain cells begin to die, and functions such as walking or talking can be impacted.

6. Heart attack: Often the result of coronary heart disease, a heart attack occurs when a coronary artery suddenly becomes blocked and part of the heart muscle is starved of blood and oxygen.

Heart disease symptoms you shouldn’t ignore

Heart issues can be subtle. In some instances, there might be no symptoms at all—especially if the disease is in its early stages. Noticing changes early gives you an advantage. You may have one or more common heart symptoms, but they don’t always mean heart disease, as many other conditions can cause similar signs. Still, if something feels off, get checked—seeing your doctor can help catch problems sooner and reduce future complications.

The most common signs of heart disease include:

Chest pain, tightness, or discomfort
Irregular heartbeat
Lightheadedness or dizziness
Fainting
Persistent fatigue
Shortness of breath

If you have a history of heart disease, risk factors, or a family history, talk with your doctor to identify issues early and reduce your risk.

5 ways to reduce your risk of heart disease

While you can’t control factors like age or family history, you can lower your overall risk by changing behaviors you can control.

1. Key numbers to know and watch:

Blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar: These major risk factors for heart disease often change without obvious symptoms. Regular checkups and screenings help you and your doctor detect issues early. If your numbers are elevated—or if you’re unsure what they mean—talk to your doctor about next steps.
Waist circumference: Fat carried around the abdomen, known as visceral fat, may be especially harmful, because it surrounds internal organs and is linked to a higher risk of heart disease. A simple way to gauge risk is to measure your waist circumference. For women, a healthy target is less than 35 inches; for men, less than 40 inches.
Maintain a healthy weight: Excess weight places added strain on the heart and can worsen blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar levels. Even modest weight loss can improve heart health and lower your risk over time.

2. Stay active: It doesn’t take much time each day to get enough moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity to help your heart. Try to get at least 150 minutes of exercise each week by incorporating more walking, stair-climbing, and muscle-strengthening activities where you can. That’s just 30 minutes a day, five days a week.

3. Quit smoking and vaping, and avoid secondhand smoke: Smoking and vaping damage blood vessels, contribute to plaque buildup in the arteries, and significantly increase the risk of heart disease and stroke. Quitting at any age can improve heart health over time.

4. Keep stress in check: When you’re under stress, it causes your heart rate and blood pressure to increase, putting you at risk. Stress-management techniques like deep breathing and meditation can help stop damage to your artery walls before it starts.

5.Healthy eating habits: No matter your age, you can decrease your risk of heart disease by opting for a healthy, well-balanced diet each day. Choose foods low in saturated fat, trans fat, and sodium while opting for more fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fish. Cut back on sugar-heavy foods and drinks, and go for leaner cuts if you eat meat.

Diagnosis and treatment are more advanced than ever

Advances in research and wearable technology are making it possible to detect heart disease earlier and manage it more effectively. Working closely with your doctor helps turn those advances into a plan that’s tailored to you—your risks, your symptoms, and your goals.

Try to make incremental changes to eat a healthier, more balanced diet; quit smoking; and become more physically active. After all, these changes serve as the best defense against heart disease and its impact on your health. Even small changes made today can have a meaningful impact on long-term heart health.

Montefiore Einstein is ranked in the top 1% of all hospitals in the nation for heart and vascular care by U.S. News & World Report

Montefiore Einstein’s nationally ranked Center for Heart and Vascular Care has also achieved a “high performing” ranking in heart failure and heart surgery from U.S. News & World Report. The Center for Heart and Vascular Care is a leader in heart rhythm disorders and interventional and minimally invasive cardiac procedures, as well as the use of ventricular assist devices (VADs) for the treatment of heart failure.

Our Center for Heart and Vascular Care is an international referral site for heart failure, arrhythmia, and mechanical circulatory support, including procedures such as cardiac device implantation and catheter ablation, performing more than 2,000 ablation procedures annually.

We continue to expand access to our heart-care excellence across the region, including the Montefiore Einstein Cardiac Surgery Program at White Plains Hospital and the Heart Center at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care, located in Westchester and Manhattan.

Montefiore Einstein is restoring lives through innovative heart care for our patients every day. Our unique patient-care model provides comprehensive, individualized treatment and leverages the vast resources available to our specialists, including groundbreaking proprietary research and state-of-the-art diagnostic and treatment technology. Developing the first transvenous cardiac pacemaker and performing the first coronary bypass operation were only the beginning of Montefiore Einstein’s more than 60 years of leadership in heart care—and we’re not slowing down.

Call (914) 457-4130 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care in Westchester. Call (212) 324-4222 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care in Manhattan. Call (914) 849-4327 to make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at the Montefiore Einstein Cardiac Surgery Program at White Plains Hospital. To make an appointment with one of our heart specialists at one of our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including in the Bronx, please call (718) 920-5949.

