Start your morning right with homestyle Blueberry Johnnycakes

Monica Kelly, MS, RD, CDN, CNSC, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Empieza el día de la mejor manera con estos JohnnyCakes caseros con arándanos

These delicious JohnnyCakes have polenta as their grain base, a complex carbohydrate derived from yellow corn that’s common in Northern Italian cuisine. Polenta is high in both fiber and protein, and an excellent choice for weight management: it takes longer to release its sugars into the bloodstream than simple carbohydrates, like all purpose flour, and keeps you feeling full for longer.

The cakes get a burst of flavor — without the fat or calories — from fresh or frozen blueberries. They’re also high in antioxidants, particularly anthocyanins, which reduce inflammation in the body. Blueberries also support brain health by protecting brain cells.

In addition to keeping the pancakes perfectly moist and fluffy, the Greek yogurt ensures you get a balanced breakfast by adding a boost of protein to this meal. Serve with an optional drizzle of honey and more fresh berries on top!

Blueberry Polenta JohnnyCakes

Ingredients:

1 cup polenta

½ cup all-purpose whole wheat flour

1 ½ teaspoons baking powder

½ teaspoon baking soda

a pinch of salt

2 eggs

1 ¼ cups plain unsweetened, fat free Greek yogurt

1 teaspoon lemon juice

¼ cup unsweetened plant-based milk (almond, coconut, oat)

4 teaspoons olive oil, divided

1 cup fresh or frozen blueberries

1 teaspoon fresh blueberries

1 teaspoon honey (optional)

Preparation:

Mix the dry ingredients; polenta, flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt in a bowl. Set aside.
In another bowl, beat the eggs with a fork. Then, add the yogurt, lemon juice, milk, and olive oil. Beat and mix in the ingredients very well.
Pour the egg mixture into the dry ingredients. Mix in the ingredients with a wooden spoon or a balloon whisk until you obtain a slightly thick mixture. Then add the blueberries and mix them well into the mixture.
Heat a frying pan and add the remaining oil. Use about ¼ cup of mixture for each pancake. Cook for 2 minutes or until bubbles form. Flip and cook for 2 additional minutes. Repeat the process until you finish the mix.
Serve 2 pancakes and place honey and blueberries on top (optional).

This recipe makes 12 pieces with a total of 6 servings.

Total preparation time is 45 minutes.

Servings: 6

Amount per serving

Calories               220

% Daily Value*

Total Fat       	5g	6%
Saturated Fat 	1g	5%
Cholesterol 	55mg	18%
Sodium 	180mg    	8%
Total Carbohydrate 	36g   	13%
Dietary Fiber 	3g         	11%
Total Sugars 	6g
Protein 	10g
Vitamin D 	0.4mcg    	2%
Calcium 	140mg     	10%
Iron	0.8mg 	4%
Potassium 	250mg   	6%

*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.

Interested in learning more about Montefiore Einstein’s commitment to creating a healthy community?

Visit  https://montefioreeinstein.org.

