Take control of your seasonal allergy and asthma symptoms

Dr. Denisa Ferastraoaru, Montefiore

The arrival of spring is a mixed blessing for tens of millions of U.S. residents with asthma and allergies, as increased pollination across the country causes symptoms that can make it hard to go outside. As climate change brings warmer temperatures for longer periods of time, spring is coming earlier and lasting longer, ramping up pollen levels and causing a more intense allergy season. May is National Asthma & Allergy Awareness Month, putting a spotlight on the information you need to better manage the symptoms of environmental allergies and asthma triggered by allergies. Keep on reading to learn how to reduce your exposure to the environmental triggers of spring and help your body to cope, as well as the causes, diagnosis and treatment options.

Take control of your triggers

While medication can help manage the symptoms, understanding the factors that trigger your allergy and asthma reactions and limiting your exposure to them whenever possible is important.

Here are some things you can do:

Start taking your allergy medicine before pollen season begins.
Limit outdoor activities when pollen counts are high to reduce the amount of pollen you inhale.
When possible, keep windows closed during pollen season and use central air conditioning with an asthma and allergy filter attachment.
Wash your hair daily before going to bed. This removes pollen from your hair and skin and helps keep it off your bedding.
Wash your bedding once a week.
Sunglasses and a hat will help keep pollen out of your eyes and off your hair when you’re outside.
If your pets spend a lot of time outdoors, limit close contact with them during allergy season.
Change and wash your clothes after outdoor activities.
Dry your clothes in a clothes dryer, not on an outdoor line.

Understand what's causing your discomfort

More than 26 million people with asthma and 50 million with allergies experience an allergic response when their immune system incorrectly identifies a benign substance such as pollen or dust as a harmful substance. In an effort to protect itself, their antibodies (immune system proteins) bind to the allergen, resulting in their immune system reacting with common allergy symptoms: itchy, watery eyes, sneezing, scratchy throat, rashes. This reaction can also occur in the lungs and airways, triggering asthma symptoms such as shortness of breath and wheezing.

While certain types of asthma are caused by environmental triggers, there are other types of asthma with different triggers. For some, an asthmatic exacerbation can occur as a result of exercise, infections, inhaling cold air or even added stress — or any combination of them. Asthma is a serious illness, so it is important to have a correct diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

Diagnosis and treatment

If you consistently experience common allergy symptoms it may be time to see a doctor for a formal diagnosis, which is a two-step process. First is your medical history, which is an important link between allergy test results and pinpointing the actual allergic disease. The second step is allergy skin testing, which helps establish your diagnosis.

An allergy skin tests exposes your skin to a variety of suspected allergy-causing substances, which is then watched for a local allergic response at the site of the skin tests. These tests are generally safe for adults and children. To get the best results, it’s important to avoid any medications that could interfere with the allergy test results. For those who are unable or uneasy about allergy skin testing, there are blood tests which can also be useful to reach a diagnosis.

Once you have a specific diagnosis, there are many treatments available to help with allergies and asthma:

• Antihistamines are usually the first step in treating allergy symptoms and are available in tablet, capsule, liquid or nasal spray formulations. This type of medication may cause drowsiness, so it is important to determine if it should be taken at night.

• Corticosteroid nasal sprays decrease the allergic inflammation and help you breathe better. Together with nasal irrigation, they represent a very important step in treating the nasal symptoms caused by environmental allergies.

• Nasal irrigation. This treatment entails washing out your nose with a saline solution. It flows through your nasal cavity into the other nostril, clearing out allergens.

• Allergy immunotherapy, also knows as "allergy shots." These shots help by gradually reducing your body’s immune system response to certain triggers. This entails regular injections over a period of three to five years. For certain allergens, there are also daily pills that may be taken. Your doctor will decide if the allergy shots of the pills are the right treatment for you.

For asthma triggered by allergies, treatment can include a short-acting or "rescue" inhaler, which helps open up the airways quickly to help you breathe more easily. Long-acting or "controller" inhalers may also be prescribed to keep the airway open for longer time periods. Based on your asthma control and the level of allergic responses, your allergist will determine if you need any additional asthma treatments.

Keep in mind that your allergy triggers can change over time, which is why regular testing will keep your treatment up to date. Choose a doctor with experience diagnosing and treating allergy symptoms to help you manage these chronic conditions and live a relatively normal life. Regular check-ins will insure you know exactly what to do when symptoms occur.

Dr. Ferastraoaru treats both adults and children for a multitude of allergic disorders, including environmental and food allergies, asthma, urticaria, atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis. To learn more about Montefiore’s world-class Division of Allergy and Immunology, visit www.montefiore.org/allergy-immunology.

