Teens with heavy periods — how much is too much and when to seek help

Elizabeth M. Alderman, MD, Chief of the Division of Adolescent Medicine, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein, and Jennifer G. Davila, MD, Co-Director of the Hemophilia Treatment Center, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein

It’s not always easy for teens and preteens to talk about periods, but it’s important to have those conversations, especially when heavy flow is getting in the way of school, sports, and social plans. Heavy periods aren’t something to be suffered through or accepted as “just a part of life,” even if they seem to run in the family. Safe, effective treatments are available and are important for supporting physical and emotional health. Understanding how much bleeding is too much, what causes excessive flow, and how doctors can help are the first steps in encouraging young people to understand their menstrual well-being, so they can feel their best every day of the month.

What’s a “heavy” period and why does it matter?

Typically, periods last 4 to 5 days, although they might vary in length and heaviness during the first few years of menstruation. Signs of an unusually heavy period include:

Bleeding that lasts longer than 7 days
Bleeding heavily enough to interfere with school, sports, hobbies, and other daily activities
Having a sensation of flooding or gushing
Bleeding heavy enough to saturate a pad, tampon, or menstrual cup in 2 hours or less
Using double protection — a tampon and a pad at the same time, for example
Having blood clots larger than a quarter
Bleeding onto bedsheets or pajamas overnight
Feeling fatigued or short of breath (due to blood loss)

More than just a disruption to your daily life, a heavy period can be a sign of other health issues like hormone imbalances and bleeding disorders. It can also lead to iron-deficiency anemia, a shortage of red blood cells that causes fatigue and weakness. Teens and preteens experiencing heavy periods are encouraged to speak to a parent and doctor, who can help them find treatment.

Hormone imbalances and bleeding disorders — and how they’re treated

A thorough medical evaluation is important to pinpoint what’s causing heavy periods. In most teens, excessive monthly bleeding can be traced to one of two treatable conditions: a hormone imbalance or a bleeding disorder that affects clotting.

Hormone imbalances: An imbalance in the hormones that control menstrual cycles, including estrogen and progesterone, is the most common cause of irregular periods in adolescents. Hormone imbalances are typically related to another health condition, such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), obesity, insulin resistance, or thyroid disease. Doctors can prescribe hormone-based therapies to regulate ovulation and control heavy bleeding, while also addressing other health conditions as needed.

Bleeding disorders: About 1 in 5 teens experiencing heavy periods has a condition that interferes with their blood’s ability to form clots. The most common is von Willebrand disease, a disorder where their blood lacks a protein (known as the von Willebrand factor) that is needed for proper clotting. Von Willebrand disease is a genetic disorder that affects up to 1% of the population, although most people don’t know they have it. When teens learn that their mother, grandmother, or aunts also have heavy periods, von Willebrand disease might explain why. Blood tests can screen for von Willebrand and other bleeding disorders, which can then be managed with medications.

Talking to teens about heavy periods

Discussing menstrual issues can feel embarrassing, but it’s especially useful for young people, who are likely still learning what a “normal” period looks like for them. Parents and family members can direct the conversation by asking specific questions about period length, the number of hygiene products used each day, and whether periods are disrupting any part of a teen’s regular activities.

Teens can be assured that excessive bleeding is not something they need to accept and learn to live with. By speaking with a doctor, they can find safe, effective treatments and get back to enjoying life without the discomfort and distraction of heavy periods.

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein has been recognized as one of the nation’s best 16 years in a row by U.S. News & World Report

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein’s (CHAM) Divisions of Adolescent Medicine and Hematology, Oncology, and Cellular Therapy are leaders in cutting-edge research to maximize the health of adolescents and young adults and have established the nation’s best adolescent medical care, with a state-of-the-art inpatient unit, specialized physicians, and pioneering research.

CHAM’s Adolescent Medicine and Hematology, Oncology, and Cellular Therapy divisions partnered to create the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein Adolescent Menstrual Program (CHAMP), which provides care for teens with heavy menstrual bleeding as well as those with menstrual concerns who have a personal or family history of a bleeding or clotting disorder.

Our program is one of only a few in New York City that is part of the Foundation for Women & Girls with Blood Disorders’ national network. As a member of this network, CHAMP’s leadership is active in the foundation’s learning and advocacy efforts around bleeding disorders.

To schedule a consultation for your teen in the CHAM Adolescent Menstrual Program, contact us at (718) 741-2342.

