Tired of urine leaks? Relief may start with your pelvic floor

Whitney L. Clearwater, MD, MPH, FACOG, Associate Program Director, Urogynecology & Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery Fellowship, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: ¿Harta de tener pérdidas de orina? El alivio empieza en el suelo pélvico

If you’ve ever accidentally leaked urine, you’re not alone—and you don’t have to live with it. Up to 45% of women experience some form of incontinence. Accidental leakage can happen for many reasons—and there are real solutions that can help you feel more in control.

Other symptoms, like pressure or a vaginal bulge, may be signs of pelvic organ prolapse. Many of these conditions are linked to how the pelvic floor is functioning. Strengthening and supporting these muscles is often the first step toward improving comfort and control to help restore your quality of life.

Here’s what to know about the pelvic floor, common symptoms, and when to seek care.

How to recognize the common symptoms of pelvic floor disorders

When the pelvic floor isn’t working properly, a range of symptoms can develop. The most common include:

Bladder leakage from common triggers like exercising, lifting, coughing, laughing, sneezing, or sex
Inability to control a sudden, intense, or frequent urge to urinate
Needing to urinate more often, including waking up at night
Feelings of heaviness, pulling, or pressure in the vagina, often worse at the end of the day
Seeing or feeling a vaginal bulge
Difficulty starting or fully emptying the bladder or bowels
Constipation or difficulty controlling gas
Discomfort or pain during sexual intercourse

The pelvic floor explained—conditions behind common symptoms

The pelvic floor is a layered group of muscles, ligaments, and connective tissue that span the base of the pelvis and support the bladder, uterus (if present), rectum, and pelvic organs. They help control urine and bowel function.

Urgency urinary incontinence or overactive bladder: Accidental leakage that occurs with a sense of urgency, frequent trips to the bathroom—even during the night—or leakage on the way to the bathroom.

Stress urinary incontinence: Accidental leakage that occurs with laughing, sneezing, coughing, exercising, or sex. The name refers to “stressing” the pelvic floor, causing leakage.

Pelvic organ prolapse (POP): Happens when the vagina bulges down from its normal, supported state and sometimes pulls down the bladder, cervix/uterus, and/or bowel behind it.

When to seek care

Seek urgent medical attention if you experience:

Blood in the urine
Pain during urination
A change in vaginal secretions
Fever, chills, nausea, or vomiting
Intense upper back or lower middle pelvic pain
Sudden change in sensation / numbness in the vulva (outer genital area) or legs
Dizziness
Loss of bowel control
Inability to urinate for 6 or more hours, especially with pain
Changes in vision

What causes pelvic floor disorders?

Several factors can cause pelvic floor disorders:

Pregnancy and childbirth
Traumatic childbirth
Aging
Menopause and perimenopause
Chronic constipation
Chronic coughing (from smoking or conditions like asthma)
Previous pelvic surgeries
Excess weight
Hereditary muscle or connective tissue weakness

Regain pelvic floor & bladder control—everyday comfort

Pelvic floor disorders can make exercise, social plans, and sex feel stressful—but relief is possible. If symptoms are hurting your quality of life, your doctor can guide you to proven options, including:

Strengthening or relaxation exercises: Treatment often starts with exercises you can do at home, like Kegels, which involve contracting and relaxing the pelvic floor muscles, and deep breathing, also known as diaphragmatic breathing, or with guided physical therapy sessions.

Bladder retraining: This therapy helps train the bladder to hold urine longer and reduce urgency and frequency.

Dietary changes: Avoiding spicy foods, alcohol, and caffeinated drinks—which can irritate the bowel and bladder—along with adjusting fluid intake, can help.

Pessaries: For women, internal support rings made of soft silicone can offer gentle support to help manage vaginal prolapse and stress incontinence. They are custom-fitted by a doctor and can be easily inserted and removed at home.

Minimally invasive procedures: Botox injections into the bladder wall can temporarily relax muscle fibers and reduce urgency and frequency. Nerve stimulation therapies, such as sacral or percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation, use mild electrical impulses to improve bladder control and reduce symptoms.

Surgical interventions: When additional help is needed, a number of safe and highly effective surgical options—often minimally invasive—can repair or support weakened tissues and structures.

Montefiore Einstein is ranked in the top 1% of all hospitals in the nation for urologic and women’s health care by U.S. News & World Report

Montefiore Einstein’s Division of Urogynecology and Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery provides comprehensive and individualized care for pelvic floor disorders. We have been at the forefront of innovation, research, and clinical care for genitourinary (GU) conditions for more than a century and, as a national leader, are a referral site for even the most complex and high-risk cases. Our multidisciplinary pelvic‑health team—fellowship-trained urologists and gynecologists collaborating with colorectal surgeons, gastroenterologists, physiatrists, and physical therapists—delivers advanced diagnostics and individualized treatment plans using the latest imaging, testing, and therapeutic techniques to restore sexual and urinary function, relieve pain, and improve each patient’s quality of life.

We continue to expand access to our women’s health excellence across the region—including now in Manhattan at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care, a state-of-the-art facility centrally located at Manhattan West Plaza, just steps from Penn Station and Moynihan Train Hall.

Call 212-324-4222 to make an appointment at Montefiore Einstein Advanced Care—Manhattan. For appointments at our other Montefiore Einstein locations in the New York metro area, including the Bronx, please call 718-944-3838.

