Treating prostate cancer while preserving sexual function & urinary control

Kara Watts, MD, Vice Chair of Urology and Director of Urologic Cancer Services, for Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: Tratar el cáncer de próstata preservando función sexual y control urinario

Treatment options for prostate cancer have dramatically expanded. Facing a prostate cancer diagnosis often raises concerns among men and their partners: will treatment affect intimacy and their ability to enjoy a satisfying sex life? While traditional options like surgery (removal of the prostate) and radiation have long been the standard, groundbreaking advances such as focal ablation, including high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), are transforming early-stage treatment by offering a different approach that emphasizes preservation of sexual and urinary function and quality of life. These innovative therapies precisely target prostate tumors while minimizing side effects that can impact sexual wellness, urinary control and overall well-being.

Focal ablation therapies target cancer and preserve the prostate

Focal ablation is a newer approach to treating prostate cancer, using MRI and/or ultrasound or other imaging studies, to locate and precisely target cancerous tissue. Instead of surgically removing the entire prostate or using radiation to treat the entire prostate, these techniques apply focused energy to eliminate only the tumor within the prostate, helping to preserve surrounding healthy prostate tissue and to minimize side effects. Several types of energy can be used in focal ablation, including:

High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) uses sound waves to destroy cancer cells.

Cryotherapy freezes the tissue.

Irreversible electroporation (IRE) uses electrical pulses to disrupt cancer cell membranes.

All focal ablation procedures are performed on an outpatient basis, with most patients returning to normal activities within a few days.

From a blood draw to a diagnosis

Screening for prostate cancer most often starts with a blood test. This blood test measures the level of a substance called prostate-specific antigen (PSA), which is produced in the prostate. The PSA level can be elevated when prostate cancer is present, although other reasons may also cause the level to rise, including increasing age, benign prostate enlargement, inflammation or infection of the prostate, taking certain medicines, use of herbal supplements, and some medical procedures. Some medications can suppress PSA levels, even when cancer is present.

An abnormal PSA blood test cannot diagnose prostate cancer but should lead to a referral to a urologist for further evaluation. A urologist may then recommend additional tests, such as additional urine or blood tests and/or an MRI scan of the prostate.

Forties or fifties? When to start testing

Prostate cancer differs from other cancers in how it is screened for, so understanding the disease and your risks is important. There are several types of prostate cancer and a growing understanding of genetic risk factors. Those at higher risk for aggressive prostate cancer — including African Americans, those with a family history of prostate and other cancers, and people with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations — should discuss prostate cancer screening with their doctor when they reach their forties. Those without such risk factors are encouraged to talk to their doctor about prostate cancer screening around age 50. Screening recommendations are based on risk factors, including:

Age: Regular screenings should begin around age 50, or earlier for those with increased risk factors.
Race: People of African descent are more likely to develop aggressive prostate cancer at an earlier age. Regular screening may be appropriate starting at age 40 to 45.
Family history and genetic factors: A strong family history of prostate cancer (a first-degree relative—parents or a sibling) or certain syndromes — which may include breast, ovarian, colon, or pancreatic cancer — increases the risk of developing prostate cancer. Having the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation is also associated with a higher risk factor for prostate cancer.
Lifestyle and diet: Eating more animal-based products (meats, poultry, dairy) may increase your risk of prostate cancer. In addition, being overweight or obese may increase your risk of developing a more aggressive form of the disease.

Montefiore Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center is among the elite 1% NCI-designated comprehensive cancer centers in the U.S and is ranked in the top 1% of all U.S. hospitals for cancer care and urology, according to U.S. News & World Report

Montefiore Einstein is one of only a few health systems in Westchester and the Bronx offering focal ablation treatments for patients with localized prostate cancer, and one of the only centers offering these treatments for recurrent prostate cancer (after radiation). As an internationally recognized center, Montefiore Einstein Urology offers both cryoablation and high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU). As a leader in advanced cancer care, Montefiore Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center and Montefiore Einstein Urology are committed to providing personalized, compassionate care for men facing prostate cancer. By combining expertise from urology, radiation oncology, and other specialties, we work closely with primary-care and family physicians to guide patients through the process of PSA testing, diagnosis, and treatment.

At our Comprehensive Cancer Center, we focus on evidence-based, patient-centered care, addressing each patient's unique needs. Our academic health system brings together clinical care and cutting-edge research, enabling us to translate the latest scientific discoveries into lifesaving treatments. We are proud to offer a full range of diagnostic and treatment options, including access to ongoing clinical trials, breakthrough treatments, and the most advanced technologies. For more information or to schedule an appointment, please contact our Urology Department at (718) 920-4531.

