What’s PSB? How to treat and prevent “problematic sexual behavior” in kids.

Lynn D. Hamberg, LMSW, MEd, Director of the J.E. and Z.B. Butler Center for Children and Families at the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore Einstein

EN ESPAÑOL: ¿Qué es el CSP? Cómo tratar y prevenir el comportamiento sexual problemático en los niños.

When it comes to bodies, kids are naturally curious. It’s perfectly normal for children to ask questions and explore their own bodies — and be curious about each other’s bodies as well. Most of the time, this leads to harmless exploration. But sometimes it crosses a line. Problematic sexual behavior (PSB) refers to those times when children 12 and under touch other children against their wishes or ignore parental intervention.

Experts consider PSB a behavioral problem, not a sexual problem. Most children who initiate PSB have other behavioral issues, like poor impulse control, attention deficit disorder, and learning disabilities. PSB reaches across socioeconomic lines, ages, and ethnicities.

It’s important to know that there are things parents can do to help prevent their children from engaging in PSB.

Preventing problematic sexual behavior in children

Teach “body safety”: It’s just as important as fire or bike safety. When your child is young, let them know that the areas covered by bathing suits are private, and tell them the real names for those body parts. If another child tries touching your child inappropriately, let them know that they should leave and tell an adult.

Place parental controls on all devices: Any child who uses a smartphone or laptop may be exposed to inappropriate explicit material. Consider your own device, if you periodically hand it to your child to keep them entertained; they may be exposed to mature content in ads or on social media.

Supervise children during at-home gatherings: When friends and families get together, children tend to socialize away from the adults, but groups of children need close supervision. If they go into a separate room, keep the door open and periodically check on them, especially if it gets too quiet.

Maintain healthy communication: Develop trust and an ongoing dialogue with your child so that they can come to you if they have a problem.

Avoid exposing children to adult sexual activity: Parents should be aware of protecting children from unexpected surprises.

Ask about school policies: Find out if your child’s school has a policy about body safety and keeping kids safe. Ask about the level of supervision at the school and how they address problematic behavior.

Helping kids exhibiting behavioral problems

First, be calm when you talk to your child about the situation and then seek support. When parents learn that a child has been involved in PSB, they often call a pediatrician, guidance counselor, or religious leader for help. That person will likely direct them to a social worker, psychologist, or psychiatrist.

Some professionals are now using cognitive behavioral treatment to help children learn to make better choices. Over an 18-week evidence-based course, children meet in groups or with a therapist to learn specific skills like better self-control and rules about sexual behavior and boundaries. The program works best when families are deeply involved in the treatment program. Parents learn supervisory skills and tactics like making sure children don’t sleep, bathe, or use the bathroom with other children.

Montefiore Einstein’s Butler Center is New York’s top resource for problematic sexual behavior in children

Montefiore Einstein’s Butler Center for Children and Families is the only program in the New York City area whose therapists have been trained to treat PSB. Our team includes a psychologist and social workers who provide support to families in an outpatient setting to help children overcome PSB behaviors.

For more than 30 years, our dedicated team of experts has also been evaluating, treating, and preventing child abuse and neglect, with a focus on minimizing trauma and maximizing safety. The No Hitting Zone program is a new and innovative anti-violence initiative designed to prevent child abuse and family violence and to encourage healthy parenting and positive discipline practices.

Children’s Hospital at Montefiore (CHAM) has been consistently recognized by U.S. News & World Report as one of the nation’s best in the areas of Pediatric Cancer, Gastroenterology & GI Surgery and Neurology & Neurosurgery.

To make an appointment for a child who is exhibiting problematic sexual behavior, call Montefiore’s Butler Center for Children and Families at (718) 920-5833.

